---
layout: default
date: 2025-05-17
title: 'The Way to DJ'
description:
  'How to carve your own meaning from ancient philosophy, sprinkle over some Theo Parrish, then imbue your craft with it. Set to one take on a pair of Technics 1210s.'
feature: 1
---

*This script was originally performed and published as [an audio essay via the Side Missions project](https://sidemissions.substack.com/p/the-way-to-dj).*

{% include quoteback.html title="Techniques" author="Lao Tzu, translated by Ursula K Le Guin" url="https://archive.org/details/le-guin" text="<div>Can you keep your soul in its body,</div><div>hold fast to the one,</div><div>and so learn to be whole?</div><div>Can you center your energy,</div><div>be soft, tender,</div><div>and so learn to be a baby?</div><div>Can you keep the deep water still and clear,</div><div>so it reflects without blurring?</div><div>Can you love people and run things,</div><div>and do so by not doing?</div><div>Opening, closing the Gate of Heaven,</div><div>can you be like a bird with her nestlings?</div><div>Piercing bright through the cosmos,</div><div>can you know by not knowing?</div><div>To give birth, to nourish,</div><div>to bear and not to own,</div><div>to act and not lay claim,</div><div>to lead and not to rule:</div><div>this is mysterious power.</div>" %}

Have you ever been humbled so utterly that you felt grateful to the bone? I read Ursula K Le Guin’s 1998 translation of Lao Tzu’s two millennia-old (and counting) *Tao Te Ching* for the first time last year and it’s lived alongside me ever since. For the first time in my adult life, I had felt an unshakeable, unclouded and judgement-free communion with an ancient wisdom. With that realisation I felt weightless, my mind enveloped by a beautiful, pink sunrise on a clear summers day. I could reconnect with myself as a 13-year old, listening to Prototype by Andre 3000 on my Sony Discman on repeat and letting the love flow through me. I’m right back there, all over again. The words hit me softly in the chest without judgment or reason, simple childlike wonder allowed to blossom freely. Be like water, find your inner child and keep the soul intact. Fuck what you know, what you think you know and what you think you don’t know. Let it go, let it all go.

Roughly translated as the *Book of the Way*, reading the millennia-old *Tao Te Ching* all these years later is an exercise in what the kids are calling ego death and the highest self-awareness. It would be a myth to claim that I have been able to reconfigure my life into a harmonious, conscious practice of the tao ever since. I have taken the first step on “a journey of a thousand miles that begins beneath my feet”, as Lao Tzu put it. The book is made to be used as a map for you to get to somewhere else. It is for you to walk the Way and to live in the world with grace. In this spirit, I have spent time reconsidering a few of the things I do through a lens of conscious, taoist thought. I intend to zero in on the experiential reality of the craft (the vibe, if you will) and how I observe Taoist teachings enmeshing to provide meaning and guidance, rather than passing value judgements. An unremarkable geezer trying to find the Way.  

First in these gentlest of crosshairs is DJing. As a quick and dirty primer, the long and short of DJing is sequencing records one after another, records dancing together in a fashion that conjures up more than the sum of the parts when done well. This basic technical premise comes from an altogether unfortunate and ugly source, in case you didn’t know — the record states that Jimmy Savile was the first person to host a party and run tunes through a turntable and makeshift sound system. Innovations on the form can be traced through the toasting and wheeling of sound-clashing in Jamaica, block parties and turntablism in New York, through to today’s industry standard digital DJ software popularised by Pioneer and others much later. The DJ “set” has gone on to achieve purpose beyond the (perfectly virtuous) aim of making people dance. Some are hailed for reinvigorating discarded music in new places (like Northern Soul in 80s dances at Wigan Casino) or re-contextualising disparate sounds in new forms (like DJ Oneman infusing sugary UK Garage with darker Dubstep). In truth, though, this discourse comes a far second when it comes to getting people through the door, in the first place. That is down to the party, the energy, the vibe itself. The DJ is an important cog, but a cog nonetheless, in the system of the dance.

Over the long run of history, the working DJ doing this kind of job has been no more exalted than the barkeep or the door staff. People bark requests at the DJ with the same vim as their drink orders at the bar, the DJ turns up for their shift on time and keeps getting asked back if they can reliably service the punters’ enjoyment. Even in celebrated contexts, like New York Ballroom, it is common for the DJ to be restricted to a backroom, out of sight as the dancers work. This might seem antagonistic to the modern DJ as rockstar that pervades mainstream, Coachella-washed fantasies and runs up brand partnerships. It’s a functional, no-frills tradition of DJing, one that I have come to cherish and go out of my way in search of as an endangered, heritage artform. These days, I routinely get The Ick by perceiving the state of DJing and artistic bankruptcy that sits atop a landscape I once naively identified as radical in and of itself. That's a whole story for another day, but firmly establishes my lowlife status as a jaded raver without throwing shade on the underground heroes doing it for the art, far away from the corporate day festival conglomerates.I increasingly think that this might be the hardest part about maintaining pure joy and love for a craft over a lifetime — keeping the light of youthful exuberance bright, while dimming the low-vibrational elements that piss you right off.

I started to DJ while at university (shout out Nottingham Trent each and every) in response to a wholly different, but equally momentous personal breakthrough — that well-worn, third-eye opening cocktail of Funktion-One soundsytems, MDMA buffets, paired with a permissive social fabric of self discovery and near-utopian quantities of free time. Pre Nick Clegg uni was the one, mate. Cliche as fuck it may be, I spent an entire second-year term’s student bursary on entry-level CDJs in an attempt to anchor my splintered, shallow identity around this scene. Chasing down sets at house parties, getting a show on pirate radio, rounding up circles of pals to the next Stealth rave, stalking the small-time local circuit on Facebook, buying a book called *How to DJ (Properly)*. I wanted proximity to and credibility in a sub-culture I identified with hard. Putting in the hours in the rave, surfing the blogs, hunting track IDs, imitating pirate radio DJ blends at home, repeat. What else was there to do? In hindsight, throwing yourself head first into something new can come off like a whole bag of cringe on the surface. "Are you still doing the DJing, Ewen?” is an innocent question I get asked by people I love to this day. I mutter something back along the lines of “it's just a hobby”, or “I just like doing it for fun”. This is mostly true, but I’m not about to pretend I didn’t start out with delusional visions of baying fans demanding “one more song”. The craft had to humble me first, before I could find my way here.

Early along this journey I encountered a loosely defined scene made up of labels that were incomprehensibly releasing fringe music on vinyl. Not content with stopping there, some acetate fundamentalists ran vinyl-only labels, with releases capped at two or three hundred presses. Sure, I could try my luck on Russian torrent sites (RIP funkysouls) waiting for one of this lot to upload a rip, but I was so scene-pilled by now that I started picking up these strange artefacts on assorted side quests to rave outposts of Berlin, Manchester and co. I quickly cottoned on that I might have to go and get a record player to listen to them, and off I went on a Gumtree hunt in search of something called turntables.

(Sidenote: I love the second hand, circular economy of DJ gear. It is a Hodge Podge of 40-something suburban ex-ravers with kids and a mortgage, 20-something serial renter sick of carting around decks gathering dust for a handful of flat back-to-backs with mates. This is the true DJ scene in my eyes, although I haven’t revisited since the Urban Outfitters-driven vinyl revival. Lots of nerds trying to hunt down obscure Japanese, discontinued, consumer electronic products and embarking on a misspent youth or coming to terms with the end of one. Teeming with pathos and weirdos, in the best way).

{% include quoteback.html title="On and off" author="Lao Tzu, translated by Ursula K Le Guin" url="https://archive.org/details/le-guin" text="<div>The Way’s brightness looks like darkness;</div><div>advancing on the Way feels like retreating;</div><div>the plain Way seems hard going.</div><div>The height of power seems a valley;</div><div>the amplest power seems not enough;</div><div>the firmest power seems feeble.</div><div>Perfect whiteness looks dirty.</div><div>The pure and simple looks chaotic.</div>" %}

I took delivery of the Volkswagen camper van of turntables, a pair of pre-loved Technics 1210s, and waved off my shiny CDJs to a new home in Boston, Lincolnshire. I had shifted downwards from automatic, assistive technology to zero bells and whistles in the process. In the cacophony of modern life, we are compelled and prodded towards shiny new technology as a virtue. Sticking with the camper analogy, here I was taking the harder, verging on heretic path from automatic to manual. I can vividly remember fluffing mix after mix, first to my housemates enjoyment and eventually to their despair through thin flat walls. My mates coming down to a UKG-only club night I played at and grimacing as I cleared the dancefloor, all at sea with the new, old gear. In the despair of this thankless grinding, it was something I heard Theo Parrish say that drove me to carry on:

{% include quoteback.html title="Red Bull Music Academy Lecture" author="Theo Parrish" url="https://www.redbullmusicacademy.com/lectures/theo-parrish-3-cheers-for-the-d" text="That’s the other scary thing, it’ll take you the better part of ten years to collect, in my opinion, the amount of vinyl that’s worthy of being presented to other people. Take you, what? A couple minutes? To download somebody’s whole collection. Now the question is, is it worth the convenience? Maybe. But are you missing out on all of the knowledge that goes into looking for those specific records? Specifically, because you know so-and-so played on this record, so-and-so played on that record, are you going to take that time and get your knuckles dusty, and go meet another crazy obsessed individual just like yourself? You got to take that time." %}

In the beginning, you experience raves and tunes with a childlike wonder. The uppers play a key role in all this, but there’s more to it than that. Feeling the ebbs and flows of energy in the room through the night, hearing that particular bass-line rattle through your chest properly for the first time, tasting 3am sweat fermented inside 5am sweat. Shouts to this week’s No Tags pod for introducing me to Nietzsche’s hot take about music being a way to access and express primordial Dionysian emotions with others. (Is getting spangled with your rave crew praxis?). There are moments on the dance floor I can remember vividly, to this day. Jackmaster (RIP) playing Burial’s *Archangel* at Outlook’s Pula fort (RIP) and Ben UFO spinning Blawan’s *Why They Hide Their Bodies Under My Garage* in the moat that same night. Cooly G unapologetically running *Au Seve* at Gala’s summer 2021 edition, just as nightclubs reopened after COVID restrictions. Mike laying down Pusha T’s *Numbers on the Boards* at Cosmic Slop in Leeds and Scratcha pulling up Frisco’s *Bad ’N’ Clean* at Amsterdam’s Lente Kabinet. The alchemy of factors that bubble up in harmony to create these moments are never an exact science, but it strikes me here and now that it was never a show of technical proficiency that lasted long in the memory (bar *that* DJ EZ Boilerroom). These moments activated a sublime, latent force of ecstatic oneness by way of understanding on a spiritual level which record begged be shared, which sounds belonged in that moment more than any other. In those moments, you are reminded that 13-year old you losing your shit with a simple Discman in hand had it all figured out.

This is me going around the houses to explain how I have ended up sat here today with a hulking collection of ancient technology, AKA a record collection and decks, alongside a steadfast commitment to keeping a heritage artform alive with them, in my own small way. In the intervening years, I’ve been listening intently to music in third places (record stores and clubs) and quietly assembling hundreds of slabs of acetate that each represent a two-way time capsule that can transport me back to the day I found it and the listener into a discrete sonic world. I don’t want to glamorise the collector aspects, especially the Supreme-style artificial scarcity imposed by limited presses and the consumerist impulse that can subtly barge its way into a hobby built around physical objects. I must steer clear of the ignorant path of hunting someone else’s “holy grail” records. I move towards a deeper knowing of the flawed, contradictory, awkward, deeply personal collection of music that I am but a temporary caretaker for.

{% include quoteback.html title="Soul Food" author="Lao Tzu, translated by Ursula K Le Guin" url="https://archive.org/details/le-guin" text="<div>For being and nonbeing</div><div>arise together;</div><div>hard and easy</div><div>complete each other;</div><div>long and short</div><div>shape each other;</div><div>high and low</div><div>depend on each other;</div><div>note and voice</div><div>make the music together;</div><div>before and after</div><div>follow each other.</div><div>That’s why the wise soul</div><div>does without doing,</div><div>teaches without talking.</div><div>The things of this world</div><div>exist, they are;</div><div>you can’t refuse them.</div>" %}

Inaction, not doing, is central to how I think about DJing generously. It’s vital to remember that the pieces of music you are playing are always doing the donkey work of making people dance. Once you have come to terms with this, you are ready to countenance the fact that in many situations, doing nothing as a DJ is greatness. Let the record play out in full. Do right by Prince and leave the pitch alone. Refrain from Limmy’s advice and stop taking the bass in and out like a pinball wizard. It’s tempting as a DJ to believe that the "value" you are adding is an unknowable formula based on how many times you touched the buttons in a technically inoffensive manner. In many situations, getting out of the music’s way will enhance the level of connection and joy in a room. Tune out the bittersweet sensation of taste and experience, return to that unencumbered and playful approach to sounds like you remember.

How can one make mixing records flow like water? This feels in opposition to the traditional UK style of mixing records like the world is about to end, with cuts and scratches for days. Someone like Ricardo Villalobos springs to mind unprompted, a modern fable of minimal techno who doesn’t blink at putting out a 30-minute plus track or DJing all night (and morning) long. He blends pieces of music together like he’s gently reuniting long lost family. The goal is not to dazzle or showboat, but to gently tie the perfect knot before anyone even notices. On the surface, this could be mistaken as a lazy or fundamentally less skilled craftsperson at work, relative to the DJ as rock star setting off crazy VFX shows while simultaneously pulling off a crescendo of a Michael Bay type-beat three-deck blend. Who is being more generous, thoughtful and caring with their audience and the craft? Which path is like water, nourishing without trying to and is content with yielding?

There is a much stronger vinyl culture in minimal techno circles than in many niche sub-genre scenes, and I think there's something in that. This scene prioritises groove over discomfort, flow over surprise and patience over action. I’m convinced that if you took Lao Tzu to a minimal rave he would cut shapes with the best of them. Funnily enough, when I started raving there was a big minimal techno scene around East London that Essex punters orbited, taking in Fuse all-daters @ 93 Feet East on Brick Lane, Saturdays @ Fabric, rounded off with an edition of Secret Sundaze. To be perfectly honest, at the time, this scene largely passed me by. The subtlety and restraint didn’t appeal to the teenage me. Today, I happily wake up early on a Sunday morning to go and bathe in a Villalobos set at Fabric on my ones. Some people get into fine wine, for others it’s prestige Minimal.

In many small yet pernicious ways, convenience kills the flow state. Convenience has been sold to us in the West (and elsewhere) as a universal good that offers us enlightenment and progress, yet it fails to make us feel more alive or in communion with anything sacred. Vinyl records are not efficient or convenient, they degrade and require care, yet the friction they entail helps produce a defining memory of everything I've picked up and connected with in any far-flung record shop along my travels. Equally, the self-imposed filter of needing to cart the bloody things around means that you are compelled to die on the hill of your pick-ups and the sharing of these gems with anyone blessing you with their ear becomes a small, generous ritual each time. When I DJ with vinyl records, especially after a period of digital DJing, I am humbled by the demands on my attention and listening. If I am not devoted in service of the next record and mindful of the outgoing one, everything reliably falls apart at the seams. The vinyls are made to be played with and cared for, and with each blend my respect and sincerity for this practice grows. Like uncut wood, the blemishes and natural flaws between the records and the craft itself are where the soul can be found.

I am humbled by how much letting go I have to do. When I am DJing in loving company, an internal battle can pipe up as one side wants to impress upon them my skill and the other wants to be a vessel for the piece of music that aches to be played at that moment. The ego is a MF. Funnily enough, Theo Parrish popped up last week with another nugget of truth that I’ll stick here:

{% include quoteback.html title="Resident Advisor EX.763" author="Theo Parrish" url="https://ra.co/exchange/802" text="So at about five years, you're still dealing with the technical part [of DJing], at ten years you're dealing with the technical part and your so-called sound. At 15 you're dealing with the ego of it all. It's not until much later that you actually start to play for and with people." %}

{% include quoteback.html title="Three Treasures" author="Lao Tzu, translated by Ursula K Le Guin" url="https://archive.org/details/le-guin" text="<div>Everybody says my way is great</div><div>but improbable.</div><div>All greatness</div><div>is improbable.</div><div>What’s probable</div><div>is tedious and petty.</div><div>I have three treasures.</div><div>I keep and treasure them.</div><div>The first, mercy,</div><div>the second, moderation,</div><div>the third, modesty.</div><div>If you’re merciful you can be brave,</div><div>if you’re moderate you can be generous,</div><div>and if you don’t presume to lead</div><div>you can lead the high and mighty.</div><div>But to be brave without compassion,</div><div>or generous without self-restraint,</div><div>or to take the lead,</div><div>is fatal.</div><div>Compassion wins the battle</div><div>and holds the fort;</div><div>it is the bulwark set</div><div>around those heaven helps.</div>" %}

“are you still doing the DJing, Ewen?” I’m just trying to be a vessel for the right record. That’s what I’ll say, next time (before getting rightly told to pull my head out of my arse).
