---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-01-21 21:26
---

We trialled a new alarm system this morning. Nadine just had the one iPhone alarm set with the nine-minute snooze. I had two alarms set, half hour apart with ten-minute snoozes. The earliest alarms were synchronised so I didn't snooze the first one, got it straight off. You might ask, why not just set one shared, initial alarm? I don't have a great answer but it just feels like a lot of pressure on one person, to be in charge of the household arising. Something about the phone is private, cordoned off, so it's not generally a site of shared responsibility. Also, giving up all control over your wake-up is weird. I'm coming round to getting an actual alarm clock, it's a neutral and shared thing that had this figured out yonks ago.

Went for a little bike ride in proper incessant drizzle and lashing winds. Nadine is a pretty slow rider, so I have to sort of dawdle and remind myself to slow down. Got a free doughnut from Greggs using my weekly Monzo perk allowance, which made me think of the brainwashing food they dish out in *They Cloned Tyrone*. I don't think Greggs are brainwashing me, but I'm slyly convinced I'm not the one thats winning in this scheme. Are there secretly shit doughnuts and sausage rolls that are siphoned off for the QR code wankers? Call me Mario Winans, 'cos I don't want to know.

Got a falafel wrap afterwards for lunch. No pickles, only tahini. Bossman was telling me that a cyclist died on the road outside, just last night. Hit by a lorry. Then, he did this rant that I've heard a hundred and one times but I was firmly caught aback here. He got a strained look about him and started talking in broad strokes about the annoying shit cyclists do. Jumping red lights, etc. Fair dos on one level. I can't stand e-bikes mounting pavements. Some cyclists are arseholes. The thing I couldn't shake was that the pretext for bashing cyclists was someone losing their life. I couldn't help but think that the unspoken logic here was that "they were asking for it", which is an unfathomably dark place to go to. I said "I just think it's really sad that happened", and left. 

Went for a run in comparatively pathetic drizzle before watching the Traitors. This lot are so wet, man. Faraaz is out on his own. The editing definitely plays into the self-seriousness and I'm sure they are all constantly told to add sauce on everything, but my guy clearly doesn't think it's that deep (it isn't). I was so gassed when he put it on Rachel at the end. The audacity when she "revealed" her FBI e-learning course with a straight face. Harriet seppuku'd herself! The collective amnesia since then is mad. I was dipping in and out of it the last couple weeks but I guess the shambles has hooked me.
