---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-02-07
---

The front garden for the flats has been in a bit of a state for the last week, so this morning I reached for the gardening gloves and did my bit for the community. The biggest offenders were a loaf of kingsmill that featured more shades of green than white, a blue corner shop bag of bananas and eggs, and a drink carton from the Asian supermarket that had become home for some Bloodborne-looking critters. The most common piece was your chicken shop box, which is collateral damage from living opposite a secondary school that I've made my peace with. As I was psyching myself up for the bread, my next door neighbour came past and fetched his litter picker for me. I got into a flow state and ended up doing his front garden as well. 

Had a potter about Spitalfields and Brick Lane w Dad, Chris and Nadine. Got the classic from Humble Crumble. I usually get the one with just custard and crumble top like a low-level psychopath, but I feel too guilty with that ratio when I'm about halfway in. Can confirm that including the actual crumble is better all round. Dad got a Chromebook recently and was finding it difficult to understand why all the apps on his phone weren't on there and why he had to visit "websites". This man has owned PCs before and quite enjoys fiddling about with new bits of tech. I was a bit surprised how quaint he was making web browsers seem, as if the device was a general downgrade. In retrospect, there is probably a grain of truth to that if all you want is a bigger screen.
