---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-01-20 21:26
---

Went to the skip today with the sad, broken toilet seat. Managed to find some MDF skirting board offcuts and lightbulbs to justify the ride over and to compensate for my insecurity about not having sufficient reason to enter the facilities without a van full of bits. The bloke at the gate asked, "what have you got?" with his usual gruff and I was given the nod to go and dispense my shit. Always fascinating to climb the stairs next to a fuck off skip and look down at the bin bag mounds. If there's room and your rubbish is weighty enough, you can launch it into the open space and get a satisfying, reverberating clatter. Not this time. I just placed my bits on top of someone else's bits and simply enjoyed the view. Went and got a Mediterranean brekkie from the cafe over the road, pure triumphant. I tried to tip on the card machine but I couldn't work out how. Why do card machines keep changing? Also, not feeling this creep of tipping culture. When are we going to get out from under America's thumb, for fuck's sake. Slowly but surely, the tentacles of their payment systems are in every transaction, bringing with it their tipping suggestions. No one asked you, mate.

Listened to the double/triple/whatever *lost in dreams* album by irini (FKA Traumprinz) this afternoon. Maybe the king of undeniable emotional bangers? Got a feeling this one will be on heavy rotation in the cups for the foreseeable. The one with the "what did you give me?" vox was today's percy. 

Booked tix for the next Lucky Cloud sound system party on Valentines. Really looking forward to this one, haven't been before. I think about Cosmic Slop all the time, how special the nights I had there were and how much I wish I could remember more of them. Getting out of your box is great but my memory is shite at the best of times. I've got a good feeling about this, I want to go to dances that sit outside of the RA DJ industrial complex. Proper lost my mojo in that world this last year. At that age where a good amount of mates have hung up their boots, club-wise. I want to try and reorient myself towards grown, "community", inter-generational and intentional good times. That too much to ask?
