---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-01-31 21:26
---

Went over to my Nan's spot at the crematorium today. Every year we go there, then a bench by the sea and round off at the Lobster Smack for lunch. My cousin, his kids, my uncle and auntie came down for a bit as well. I really look forward to these days, traversing Canvey Island to these sites of rich memories. I'm grateful that the family has found ways to celebrate my nan's life and reorientate after the loss of it's longstanding glue. I thought about the shifting roles and responsibilities that we are all experiencing, how new family members are welcomed and we have to help guide them correctly as the previous generation did for us. It's sad and beautiful at the same time, but more of the latter. I think accepting and embracing your duty of care to others is the best measuring stick of adulthood.

I overheard a lad in the pub talking to who I assume were his grandparents about his regrets on going to university. I didn't get all the details, but he studied film and didn't end up getting a job in the industry from what I could gather. He looked late twenties, which would put him in the "plan two" student loan category that is completely fucking over people who went to university in the 2010s. Martin Lewis et al. [have been all over it this week](https://www.ft.com/content/277ae912-e927-4b85-9220-573b100abc37), how the terms of the loan changing would never be allowed elsewhere. What pissed me off the most was Rachel Reeves talking about the system being fine, how it isn't right that people who don't go to university bear the cost. Can someone please explain to her how taxes work? You don't decide what you put in for (or don't), we are supposed to decide as a society what we want to pool our resources in for and then add to the kitty based on our means. I hate the subtext of trying to pit non/university educated people against each other, too. Lots of families consist of people who didn't go to university making sacrifices so their kids could. Now those kids are still living at home into their thirties. Say want you want about the merits of mickey mouse degrees, I don't see how it helps anyone to have swathes of each generation getting hoodwinked into crippling debt for a bold decision over their future they made at 18 years old.

Watched Newcastle get battered at Anfield in the evening. The highlight was watching Gordon almost repeat his sending off in the reverse fixture and then get the opening goal in front of the Kop. It went quickly downhill from there. Florian Wirtz is really good at football, from what I could tell. Konate scoring a late goal, coming back early to help the team out after his dad died, was life-affirming.  

