---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-01-19 21:26
---

This morning I reignited a short-running feud with the wife about acceptable alarm snooze durations. 

Here's an example of where I'm coming from:
- person A alarm 1 @ 7am, 10 mins snooze
- person A alarm 2 @ 7.30am, 10 mins snooze
- person B alarm 1 @ 7am, 9 mins snooze
- person B alarm 2 @ 7.10am, 9 mins snooze

If person A snoozes through to 7.30 am, four alarms will go off in half an hour at ten minute intervals. If person B snoozes through to 7.30am, seven alarms will go off at irregular intervals. On top of that, the alarms will clash with each other. Apparently old iPhones alarms snooze time is fixed to 9 minutes as well. Why did they choose violence like that? This isn't how to enter the day with grace. We're going to try and remedy it at the weekend, maybe get an actual alarm to share? Seems like a major commitment but watch this space.

Had a good AFCON recap with the Algerians down the cafe this morning. Sounded like everyone was happy about how things turned out and there were full celebrations going on back home and in Egypt as far as they knew. The consensus seems to be that Morocco's football establishment have been on fuckery all tournament and perceived justice was dished out. Fair fucking play.

I went to my first Farsi class of the year in the evening, kicking off part two of level one. Idk why they didn't call it level two, give the troops a bit of morale. I love my teacher but she does one unforgivable thing - when she talks about Iranian food, she starts image searching dishes and projecting them up front. I don't get home for tea until quarter past eight at the earliest, so this is all happening slap bang in the middle of my peak hunger. This week some next gas works were happening from Aldwych all the way down to the Old Vic in Waterloo, meaning my bus wasn't running to the usual station and I had to get a salivated jog on over the bridge. Still, today I learnt how to say "yesterday, I ate a sandwich" in Farsi.