---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-01-22 21:26
---

Had a fun chat with my Dad after lunch. I figured out how to give him access to my Plex server, which he's all over. Last night he watched *One Battle After Another* and we recapped the car chase. Because these are alI films that I have curated and offered up, you get a nice feeling that's a bit like when you lend someone an actual book or DVD. Added bonus that they can't steal it from you forever and create resentment. I know there's renewed hype around physical media, but I reckon reclaiming digital libraries is a lost art that needs bringing back. We cycled through the other cornerstone topics of football, politics and life.

When I was on the 453 going up Old Kent, I saw a Fiat 500 with the number plate *BI EN0*. I immediately thought that Brian Eno must be driving the car. The next thought I had was that if he is indeed driving the car with that plate, what would it mean? He stunts like a newly-minted footballer on his first big contract? The bus was stopped diagonally behind the car for a good 30 seconds for me to mull this over. Then, we overtook the vehicle and this inane bubble was burst. No Eno.

Got into a bit of *Death Stranding 2* in the evening. Did a short hike and was rewarded with a soothing Caroline Polachek needle drop. Liking it all so far, the thing is just so beautiful and it plays smooth as anything. Met the cat with wings and the stop-motion doll bloke. The Kojima vibes are locking in, letting it wash over and savouring it.
