---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-02-03
---

Got up at 7 again. Feeling myself.

Found myself pre-occupied with this Epstein business, today. In [the last Side Missions episode](https://ewen.io/sounds/2025-09-12-uk-twee-the-american-gaze) I sampled Peter Mandelson on the blower, gleefully trying to polish the turd that was the Millenium Dome. It was taken from *Shifty*, Adam Curtis' singular forensic expose of the hollowness at the core of post-Thatcher Britain up to New Labour. I can't recommend watching it enough, if you haven't already. It adds so much texture to this time. I think I might go back into it after all this.

I deeped it that I've still never voted for a winning party and it wasn't any better before I came of age, either. This country's establishment political/media class are the equivalent of the kid in the group work project that does fuck all while everyone else grafts for them, because they were too busy railing gear. Party, and bullshit. It feels like there is only the pretence of public service these days, that it's something to be performed and carefully choreographed so that the power brokers can get on with the dealings and noshings out of sight. I think most normal people can smell out a social climber, someone who would sell their nan down the river for a leg up, and steer well clear. That kind of person finds their tribe and the backscratching and backstabbing goes hand in hand, all the way to the top. Farage is fucking inevitable, at this point.

Still loving *Death Stranding 2*. I didn't really get all the way into the side deliveries in the first game but everything's clicking, this time. I usually play for 45 mins before bed, do a delivery or two. I reckon that's the sweet spot.
