---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-02-02
---

Got up at 7 today. That's the sweet spot, for me. I enjoy my mornings more when I have time to do bits and pieces before work. If I snooze a bit then the morning feels off-key and I counter-intuitively snooze more the next day. I lost my rhythm a bit in the christmas/ny shuffle but it's all good, we move (and rise). Here's a vow to myself that I maintain this pattern.

Pottered about on Substack a bit while I was having my lunch. The vibes, as they say, seem a little bit off. No Tags spoke about it a bit [on their most recent podcast](https://notagspodcast.substack.com/p/anjali-prashar-savoie), focusing on the pile-on by big names (see charli xcx) and the parallels to celebrity Twitter, as well as the different world of "Notes". I saw that they are now [doing a TV app as well](https://on.substack.com/p/introducing-the-substack-tv-app-now)?? I only recently re-installed the phone app and deleted it again. Each to their own but the thing I like about Substack is the blogosphere scattiness and real writers working on the craft. Feeds and talking heads and pivot-to-video can fuck off tbh. I'm going to stick to the [POSSE](https://indieweb.org/POSSE) model for my own work and assume that all these American tech companies will eventually enshittify themselves.

Farsi lesson in the evening was a bit of alright. I'm almost certain the class is on a list. At the start of every lesson this term, my teacher makes us converse about the weekend and gleefully shoehorns in as many overt references to the Islamic Republic of Iran's fuckery (as well as the BBC's) as possible. I'm down for the cause so I'll have some of that. 
