---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-01-30 21:26
---

One of our recycling bins went missing a couple of weeks ago. I took it upon myself to order a new one and someone in the building group chat excitedly announced it had arrived that same day. The situation evolved today when ANOTHER green bin turned up at the door, this one further legitimised by a _confirmation email_. This immediately brought the last green bin into disrepute. Arriving on the same day? Should've guessed something was up. Anyhow, the flat below reckons we should just keep it. I feel a bit bad for the basement flat because I feel like the extra bin is encroaching on his doorway, just a little bit. He hasn't said anything yet so I'm going to leave it all there. 

After a long while, I came back to Limmy's *Disco Elysium* streams today. He's the only "streamer" I ever watch, mainly because he's one of my favourite people in general and that's just what he likes doing now (as well as a glorious [diary of mundanity](https://brianlimond.substack.com/p/easy-peelers-magnolia-telly-returns)). *Disco* is one of my favourite games of all time and the crossover is magic. He's in the church at the 'mo, boasting about his previous life as a Flash developer to Soona, the programmer. 

Nadine and I went out for dinner at Pahlavan in Brockley, an Iranian spot. Both looked like drowned rats by the time we got there. It was one of those places that has a few businesses on the premises in different sections. We both had koobideh, mine a vegan edition and hers a lamb. Plus some kashk budemjan. Wasn't too bad. I've been coaching Nadine through *Red Dead Redemption 2* for what must be getting on for a year, now, and managed to get into part two of the epilogue when we got home. She likes the horse riding and animal spotting the most.
