---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-01-18 21:26
---

Today was a bastard of a day of chores. Cleaned the oven, mopped the floor, took out the washing machine filter, changed the bedding, hoovered the stairs. Went to do the hallway outside the flat (vestibule is pushing it) but my neighbour was locked in a painfully circular debate at the front door with some local Labour councillors and I was going nowhere near that. But yeah, one of them Sundays that gets straight devoured by simply looking after the gaff. I am the type of sad cunt in my thirties that is a bit pleased with myself, grateful even, for the uplift in _ambiance_ and lingering anti-bac odours post housework. I think a bit of this can be explained by owning my own home and not having the thought of upping sticks once a year or so lurking.  Thinking "no, I will not live in a more pleasant flat 'cos my landlord would also enjoy that" is a shambles but I reckon that was going on for me a bit. 

There's an eyesore that held me back from full domestic bliss, though. My mum bought us a new toilet seat for Christmas, this rich mahogany MDF number. I fitted it and everything, but the old plastic one is waiting to go out. It's knackered and the joints are busted. It's just sat by the stairs and getting shot of it is a whole thing. Technically, I think I need to take it to the recycling centre, which is ten minutes away on my bike. Last time I went there were blokes bringing vans full of stuff and I feel insecure about turning up with a single toilet seat in my backpack. I thought about that John Wilson episode where he tries to throw out some batteries and goes down that rabbit hole to the very end to question the futility of so much disposal. What the fuck is actually going to happen with my toilet seat? I need to get on my bike and get this over and done with.

I had a banging cheese and tomato toastie on this sourdough bread we got from the market yesterday morning. Christened the newly sparkling grill. Listened to the Newcastle game (what a shower of shite that was) while I packed away the records I took to play at Alex's yesterday. I listened to the new Dry Cleaning record as well, seems like there's something there for me I reckon. Maybe wrote off the drole vocal affect and lyrics as novelty/irony a bit soon.

Watched the AFCON final after dinner. In with a strong shout for greatest 0-0 (after 90 minutes) of all time. Brahim Diaz's wretched panenka hit like divine intervention on crack. Had to run in on my wife's foot bath to share the news. Football is one of the only things I regularly watch "live" any more, and it still throws up spontaneous monocultural moments like this. The group chats pinged off and I got that warm feeling of sharing an important moment in time together. Very cute.