---
title: Note
layout: default
date: 2026-01-23 21:26
---

I usually go for a good walk every morning, after showering and eating brekkie. I didn't go this morning because I read an email from NHS blood donation telling me about a Channel 4.0 show called *Love is in the blood*, where people have a blind date while giving blood. So, instead of the great outdoors, I got royally sucked in to this slop. Was it worth it? Almost certainly not, but I did laugh out loud at the end when one fella decided he *didn't* want to see his date's face. That probably makes me sound like a prick but go and watch it, first. I guess I've ruined the surprise anyway. 

We had someone round to do an estimate for double-glazing and draught-proofing our windows. They're sash windows which are lovely, but fucking hopeless at keeping the flat warm in winter or cool in summer. I reckon we'll do it, the thought of having reasonable temperature control is actually exciting. You just get used to something being shit, don't you? Then you push through and make something better and look back at your former self in pure disgust. Human adaptation is a double-edged sword. 

Nadine wanted to get Nando's for dinner, so that was that. I rode my bike to Peckham to pick it up in rush hour. Hadn't rode during that time for a while and that stretch of New Cross road by the bus garage is always a bit of a madness. They got my burger order wrong so I had to wait about for a bit. I saw a gaggle of young lads going up to order, they must've been about 16. I tried to remember the feeling of going out to eat with your boys for the first time, without the mums. The levels of grown and sexy, never to be topped. I squished the order into my bag and got back to base.
